docs(network-ports): add network ports and protocols reference (#2732) (#2928)
hiero-ledger/hiero-block-node: docs/block-node/operations/network-ports-and-protocols.md

|---------------------|------------------|-------------------|------------------------------------------------|----------------|------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------|
| `40840`             | gRPC over HTTP/2 | Inbound           | Consensus Node / Mirror Node / peer Block Node | No (h2c)       | Yes, at Ingress / LB                     | External (LoadBalancer / Ingress)         |
| `40840`             | HTTP/1.1 GET     | Inbound           | Kubelet (health probes)                        | No (h2c)       | n/a (intra-cluster)                      | Internal (ClusterIP only)                 |
| `16007`             | HTTP             | Inbound           | Prometheus / monitoring                        | No             | Typically internal only                  | Internal (ClusterIP / NodePort)           |
| `5005`              | TCP / JDWP       | Inbound           | Debugger                                       | n/a            | n/a                                      | **Dev / test only - never in production** |

> | `40840` (remote BN) | gRPC over HTTP/2 | **Outbound**      | Block Node (backfill)                          | No (h2c)       | Optional, gated by `BACKFILL_ENABLE_TLS` | External (peer Block Node)                |

Reviewer: Note, the first and last rows are likely to change with current PR #2880 which will enable each plugin to use different ports.  Initially the Publish, Status, and Subscribe APIs will each be on a different port.

It might be worth listing those as separate rows here, including Backfill port, which is just the Subscribe API port for the remote BN. 

Added note, ports listed here are _defaults_, all of them are configurable and may vary by BN.

---

## Common confusions

Operators familiar with the Hedera consensus network may reach for the wrong port number. The two networks use different defaults.

|         Component         | Default gRPC port |
|---------------------------|-------------------|
| **Block Node**            | `40840`           |
| **Hedera Consensus Node** | `50211`           |

`50211` is the Hedera Consensus Node's public gRPC port and is unrelated to the Block Node. Subscribing to a Block Node from a Mirror Node or other client uses `40840`, not `50211`.

---

## Port reference

### 40840 - gRPC Block Stream

The Block Node's primary network surface. Serves three gRPC flows on the same listening port:

- **Publish** - Consensus Nodes stream finalized blocks into the Block Node via `BlockStreamPublishService`.
- **Subscribe** - Mirror Nodes and downstream Block Nodes consume the block stream via `BlockStreamSubscribeService.subscribeBlockStream`.
- **Server status** - clients query block-range availability via `BlockNodeService.serverStatus` before subscribing.

> The same listener also serves HTTP GET on `/healthz/livez` and `/healthz/readyz` for Kubernetes probes (see [Health and readiness probes](#health-and-readiness-probes-40840)).

Reviewer: This will definitely change with PR 2880.  Each of these three APIs should be on a different port (initially just 2, but we'll follow with further splits), and the internal health probe should be the only "API" on the "primary" port.

The reason for the split, BTW, is for firewalls.  We need different rules for Publish, Subscribe, and Status; and different ports makes it easier to configure firewalls with different rules.

|     Field      |                               Value                                |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Default port   | `40840`                                                            |
| Allowed range  | `1024`–`65535`                                                     |
| Protocol       | gRPC over HTTP/2 (cleartext, h2c)                                  |
| Direction      | Inbound                                                            |
| Initiator      | Consensus Node, Mirror Node, peer Block Node (one per gRPC client) |
| TLS in-process | No                                                                 |
| Helm value     | `service.port`                                                     |
| Env var        | `SERVER_PORT`                                                      |

#### Notes

> - The publish, subscribe, and serverStatus RPCs all share the single `40840` listener; they are distinguished by the gRPC service and method, not by port.

Reviewer: This will change with PR 2880.

- The Block Node forwards block items to subscribers as they arrive from the publisher, without first verifying the block. Verification is self-contained at the consumer via the Block Proof carried with each block; see [HIP-1056](https://hips.hedera.com/hip/hip-1056).

> - The connection is closed by the server when the requested block range is fully served, when the idle-connection timeout elapses (default 30 minutes, `idleConnectionTimeoutMinutes` in `ServerConfig.java`), or on internal error. Firewall idle-connection timeouts should accommodate long-lived streams.

Reviewer: We don't really track idle.  The Idle connection timeout is internal to the Helidon library and tracks _TCP_ idle, which (with keepalives) almost never happens.

The primary connection close conditions are:
1. All requested blocks served
2. Internal error
3. Stream maximum duration reached (default *will be* 24 _hours_, but currently a bug means it's infinite).

| TLS in-process     | n/a                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Enabled where      | `block-node/app/docker/docker-compose.yml` (debug profile only)                                                                                                                                                    |
| Enabled how        | `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS=… -agentlib:jdwp=transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=*:5005`                                                                                                                         |
| Helm chart default | **Not enabled.** The chart's `JAVA_TOOL_OPTIONS` helper injects only logging and metrics flags; `-agentlib:jdwp` is never added by chart defaults. Verified by rendering `helm template charts/block-node-server`. |

#### Notes

- The docker-compose debug profile binds JDWP on `*:5005` - every network interface. This is acceptable on a single-developer host but unacceptable anywhere reachable from a network the operator does not control.

> - The Helm chart does not inject the `-agentlib:jdwp` argument. An operator who enables JDWP in a chart-managed deployment must also constrain the pod's network exposure with a `NetworkPolicy`; there is no in-process authentication on JDWP.

Reviewer: Might be worth adding a third bullet point that enabling JDWP will significantly reduce the performance of the software.

| Protocol      | gRPC over HTTP/2; subscribes via `BlockStreamSubscribeService.subscribeBlockStream`                                                                             |
| Direction     | **Outbound** from this Block Node                                                                                                                               |
| Initiator     | This Block Node                                                                                                                                                 |
| TLS           | Off by default (`BACKFILL_ENABLE_TLS=false`); see [TLS requirements](#tls-requirements)                                                                         |
| Sources list  | `BACKFILL_BLOCK_NODE_SOURCES_PATH` points to a JSON file on disk; default empty (`""`)                                                                          |
| Plugin loaded | The `backfill` plugin is loaded by chart defaults. Egress occurs only if `BACKFILL_BLOCK_NODE_SOURCES_PATH` is set to a non-empty file listing peer Block Nodes |

#### Notes

> - A Block Node with no `BACKFILL_BLOCK_NODE_SOURCES_PATH` file mounted makes no outbound gRPC connections of this kind. The plugin loads but stays idle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A Block Node with no `BACKFILL_BLOCK_NODE_SOURCES_PATH` file mounted makes no outbound gRPC connections of this kind. The plugin, if present, loads but stays idle.
```

> - The list of peer Block Nodes is operator-supplied via a JSON file mounted into the pod. Firewalls and security groups must permit egress to every listed peer's `40840` port.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The list of peer Block Nodes is operator-supplied via a JSON file mounted into the pod. Firewalls and security groups must permit egress to every listed peer's "Subscribe API" port (default 40840).
```

### Health and readiness probes (40840)

> Kubernetes probes hit the Block Node's HTTP/2 listener with HTTP/1.1 GET requests on dedicated paths. This is the same port as gRPC (`40840`), not a separate listener.

Reviewer: Minor wording recommendation.
Also removing "same port" language, replacing with "primary port" alternative.

```suggestion
Kubernetes probes query the Block Node's HTTP/2 listener with HTTP/1.1 GET requests on dedicated paths. These queries use the server "primary" port (default: 40840).
```

|     Field      |                               Value                                |
|----------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Port           | `40840` (shared with gRPC; same Helidon listener)                  |
| Liveness path  | `/healthz/livez` (default; `blockNode.health.liveness.endpoint`)   |
| Readiness path | `/healthz/readyz` (default; `blockNode.health.readiness.endpoint`) |
| Protocol       | HTTP/1.1 GET                                                       |
| Direction      | Inbound                                                            |
| Initiator      | Kubelet                                                            |

#### Notes

- Probe traffic is intra-cluster only - kubelet to pod IP. Cluster-external firewalls do not need a rule for it.
- A `NetworkPolicy` that restricts ingress to port `40840` must explicitly allow the kubelet to reach the pod, or the probes will fail and Kubernetes will restart the pod.

---

## Traffic flows by node tier

> The `tier` of a Block Node describes where its block stream originates. The two tiers exchange the same data over the same port (`40840`); the operator-visible difference is which side of the gRPC connection the Block Node sits on. For full tier and type taxonomy, see [Block Node Types](../Block-Node-Types.md).

Reviewer: Probably best not to specify "same port".  Referring to port by API name is generally recommended.  If a port number is _also_ needed, it should be referenced as a default value.

Example:

```suggestion
The `tier` of a Block Node describes where its block stream originates. Tier 1 nodes receive data via the "Publish API" port (default: `40840`) and Tier 2 nodes request data via the "Subscribe API" port (default: `40840`). The operator-visible difference is which API is used. For full tier and type taxonomy, see [Block Node Types](../Block-Node-Types.md).
```

Block Node tiers and types are visualised in the network architecture diagram at [block-node-network-architecture.svg](../../assets/block-node-network-architecture.svg).

### Tier 1 Block Node

> Receives the block stream **directly from Consensus Nodes**. The Consensus Node is the gRPC client; the Block Node accepts on `40840`. A Tier 1 deployment is the connection point between the consensus network and downstream block-stream consumers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Receives the block stream **directly from Consensus Nodes**. The Consensus Node is the gRPC client; the Block Node accepts on the "Publish API" port. A Tier 1 deployment is the connection point between the consensus network and downstream block-stream consumers.
```

|                 Flow                  | Direction |       Port       |                     Notes                      |
|---------------------------------------|-----------|------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Publish (Consensus Node → Block Node) | Inbound   | `40840` gRPC     | One stream per active Consensus Node publisher |
| Subscribe (Mirror / Tier 2 → BN)      | Inbound   | `40840` gRPC     | Multiple long-lived subscribers                |
| Metrics scrape                        | Inbound   | `16007` HTTP     | Intra-cluster                                  |
| Probes                                | Inbound   | `40840` HTTP/1.1 | Intra-cluster from kubelet                     |

> | Backfill (optional)                   | Outbound  | `40840` to peer  | Only if `backfill` plugin enabled              |

Reviewer: The Status API is missing here.
Publishers and Subscribers alike query the Status API to determine available blocks, available services, and response latency.

| Subscribe (Mirror / downstream → BN) | Inbound      | `40840` gRPC              | Same shape as Tier 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Metrics scrape                       | Inbound      | `16007` HTTP              | Intra-cluster                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Probes                               | Inbound      | `40840` HTTP/1.1          | Intra-cluster from kubelet                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

> | Backfill (optional)                  | Outbound     | `40840` to peer           | Only if `backfill` plugin enabled                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Backfill (optional)                  | Outbound     | `40840` to peer           | Only if `backfill` plugin present and enabled                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
```
